Create E3SM.rst (#15)
atmsillinois/uiuc-atmos-computing: source/E3SM.rst

Getting Started with E3SM
+++++++++++++++++++++++++
This page provides a guide to setting up E3SM on Keeling.

Downloading the model
=====================

Create a E3SM2_1 directory in your home directory 
-------------------------------------------------
``mkdir E3SM2_1/`` 

Next, create a E3SM folder in your /a/ directory. 
This will store the model outputs and data about the cases that are being run.

``cd a``

``mkdir E3SM`` 

Create a SSH key to your GitHub account to download E3SM
---------------------------------------------------------
Click `here`_ for a guide through the setup process.

.. _here: https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-github-account?platform=linux

Downloading the model
---------------------

> First, make sure to navigate to your E3SM folder from youd home directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, make sure to navigate to your E3SM folder from your home directory.
```

> ``cd E3SM2_1/``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``cd ~/E3SM2_1/``
```

Navigate to your E3SM directory:
``cd E3SM``
and list the files using ``ls``.

You should see the following files:

* AUTHORS	
* CONTRIBUTING.md	
* README.md	
* cime_config	
* components	
* driver-moab	
* run_e3sm.template.sh 
* CITATION.cff 
* LICENSE	
* cime	
* codemeta.json	
* driver-mct
* externals	
* share

Modules
-------
Navigate to your home directory, then edit the file ``.modules7``.

Add the following lines:

.. code-block:: console

 module load gnu/gnu-9.3.0
 module load gnu/netcdf4-4.7.4-gnu-9.3.0
 module load gnu/openmpi-4.1.2-gnu-9.3.0
  
After saving the file, you will either need to relogin to Keeling, or use the commands
``module purge``
``.~/.modules7``
to load the modules correctly.

Note that these modules can fail CESM builds - you will have to come back and delete those lines if you need to run a CESM model.

Edit XML Scripts for Keeling
============================

Machine Configuration
---------------------
Navigate to the cime_config/machines folder. 
``cd /data/keeling/a/<NetId>/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime_config/machines/``

Add the following to the file ``config_machines.xml`` in ``/data/keeling/a/<NetID>/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime_config/machines``

> Don’t forget to change the netID from <NetID>. You can place the code block at the end of the code. Make sure you paste this before <default_run_suffix>!!:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don’t forget to change the netID from <NetID>. You can paste this code block near the end of the file but make sure you paste it before <default_run_suffix>:
```

> .. code-block:: console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: xml
```

    <BATCH_SYSTEM>slurm</BATCH_SYSTEM>
    <SUPPORTED_BY>e3sm</SUPPORTED_BY>
    <MAX_TASKS_PER_NODE>48</MAX_TASKS_PER_NODE>
    <MAX_MPITASKS_PER_NODE>48</MAX_MPITASKS_PER_NODE>
    <PROJECT_REQUIRED>FALSE</PROJECT_REQUIRED>
    <mpirun mpilib="openmpi">
      <executable>mpirun</executable>
        <arguments>
        <arg name="num_tasks">-n {{ total_tasks }}  </arg>
        
      </arguments>

    </mpirun>
    <module_system type="module">
    </module_system>

  </machine>

Checking the validity of ``config_machines.xml``
------------------------------------------------
Run the following command from any directory, making sure to replace <NetID> with your netID:

``xmllint --xinclude --noout --schema /data/keeling/a/<NetId>/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime/CIME/data/config/xml_schemas/config_machines.xsd /data/keeling/a/<NetId>/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime_config/machines/config_machines.xml``

If it successfully ports, you should see the following message:

.. code-block:: console

	/data/keeling/a/<NetId>/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime_config/machines/config_machines.xml validates

Batch Configuration
-------------------
From the same directory, edit the file ``config_batch.xml``

Add the following lines:

> .. code-block:: console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: xml
```

    <batch_mail_flag>--mail-user netID@illinois.edu</batch_mail_flag>
    <batch_mail_type_flag>--mail-type</batch_mail_type_flag>
    <batch_mail_type>none, all, begin, end, fail</batch_mail_type>
    <submit_args>
      <arg flag="--time" name="$JOB_WALLCLOCK_TIME"/>
      <arg flag="-q" name="$JOB_QUEUE"/>
    </submit_args>
    <directives>
      <directive> --job-name={{ job_id }}</directive>
      <directive> --partition=sesempi</directive>
      <directive> --nodes={{ num_nodes }}</directive>
      <directive> --ntasks-per-node={{ tasks_per_node }}</directive>
      <directive> --constraint=j48</directive>
      <directive> --output={{ job_id }}.%j </directive>
      <directive> --exclusive </directive>
      <directive> --mail-type=FAIL </directive>
      <directive> --mail-type=END </directive>
      <directive> --mail-user=NetId@illinois.edu </directive>

    </directives>
     <queues>
      <queue walltimemax="168:00:00">sesempi</queue>
     </queues>
  </batch_system>

**Important: You will find another batch system  <batch_system type="slurm" > in the middle of the config_batch.xml file. So you need to remove this block:**

> .. code-block:: console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: xml
```

  <batch_system type="slurm" >
    <batch_query per_job_arg="-j">squeue</batch_query>
    <batch_submit>sbatch</batch_submit>
    <batch_cancel>scancel</batch_cancel>
    <batch_directive>#SBATCH</batch_directive>
    <jobid_pattern>(\d+)$</jobid_pattern>
    <depend_string>--dependency=afterok:jobid</depend_string>
    <depend_allow_string>--dependency=afterany:jobid</depend_allow_string>
    <depend_separator>:</depend_separator>
    <walltime_format>%H:%M:%S</walltime_format>
    <batch_mail_flag>--mail-user</batch_mail_flag>
    <batch_mail_type_flag>--mail-type</batch_mail_type_flag>
    <batch_mail_type>none, all, begin, end, fail</batch_mail_type>
    <submit_args>
      <arg flag="--time" name="$JOB_WALLCLOCK_TIME"/>
      <arg flag="-p" name="$JOB_QUEUE"/>
      <arg flag="--account" name="$PROJECT"/>
    </submit_args>
    <directives>
      <directive> --job-name={{ job_id }}</directive>
      <directive> --nodes={{ num_nodes }}</directive>
      <directive> --output={{ job_id }}.%j </directive>
      <directive> --exclusive </directive>
    </directives>
  </batch_system>

Checking the validity of ``config_batch.xml``
----------------------------------------------

> Run the following command, making sure to replace <NetID> with your netID:
> ``xmllint --xinclude --noout --schema /data/keeling/a/<NetId>/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime/CIME/data/config/xml_schemas/config_batch.xsd /data/keeling/a/<NetId>/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime_config/machines/config_batch.xml``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following command:
``xmllint --xinclude --noout --schema /data/keeling/a/$USER/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime/CIME/data/config/xml_schemas/config_batch.xsd /data/keeling/a/$USER/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime_config/machines/config_batch.xml``
```

If it successfully ports, you should see the following message:

.. code-block:: console

	/data/keeling/a/<NetId>/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime_config/machines/config_machines.xml validates

Editing the userdefined files
-----------------------------

Go to the ``cmake_macros`` folder:
``cd /data/keeling/a/<NetId>/E3SM2_1/E3SM/cime_config/machines/cmake_macros/``

Here, we will make a copy of userdefined.cmake in case of mistakes or for comparison.
``cp userdefined.cmake userdefined_copy.cmake``

First, rename ``userdefined.cmake`` to ``keeling.cmake``, as shown below:

``cp userdefined.cmake keeling.cmake``

> Now, edit the ``keeling.cmake`` file. Change the contents to the coded provided below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, edit the ``keeling.cmake`` file. Change the contents to the code provided below.
```

> .. code-block:: console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: cmake
```
